---

title: Symmetric Cryptosystems
id: symmetric

---

```
A cryptosystem consists of three things:
- Key generation cipher
- Encryption cipher
- Decryption cipher
```


## Basics
It's sometimes also known as Single Key Cryptography or Secret Key Encryption. It uses a single key which is used for both encryption and decryption purposes, which is known as **Secret Key**, and must be protected at all costs.

The primary purpose of this system is ensuring confidentialty viz. making sure our information is away from prying eyes.

Symmetric Cryptosystems are very fast because of their mathematical simplicity, such as 

## Types of Symmetric Ciphers

### Stream Cipher
- The plaintext is segreagated into blocks of 1-byte and each block is encrypted at a time, using a particular key
- Every single byte is encrypted using a different keys, which is why every single block has a different key
- Key reuse must never be there, otherwise the whole cryptosystem would break

### Block Cipher
- The plaintext is segreagated into blocks of n-characters (bits), and if the plaintext is smaller than the block size, the remaining space is padded to fill up the gap
- A whole block is encrypted together at the same time

## Key Exchange in Symmetric Cryptosystems
### Why is key exchange required?
Symmetric Key Cryptography, by its design, is secure and fast in nature, but it gets a bit problematic around Key Exchange.

Consider an example, Bob wants to send Linda an encrypted message, he uses a Symmetric Cipher (say AES) with his key to encrypt the message. The encrypted attachment is ready to be sent over the Internet, but once Linda receives the same, how is the going to open the attachment? She doesn't know the key herself. 

If we think about how, how can she obtain the key?
- She could call Bob up and ask for the key, which by the way doesn't scale at all, and there are inherent security risks in that too. 
- She could email him, again security risks because a key is a very private entity.
- She could meet Bob in person? C'mon, you got my point.


Solutions like this generally come to our mind, but it doesn't scale at all, and are not possible all the times. Scientists have come up with some marvellous techniques by which a key exchange can take place. We will be talking about them now. Some are:
- Using Pre-Shared Keys 
- Using Asymmetric Cryptography
- Using Diffie-Helman Key Exchange

