---

title: Introduction
id: pl-basics
pagination_label: 'Why study programming?'
sidebar_label: 'Basics'

---

> We know a CPU is all about fetch-decode-execute cycle. But where actually those instructions come from? They need to be written, the technique is known as Programming viz. writing instructions for the computer, to tell it what to do. A computer is a dumb machine.


## Different generation of programming languages

:::info Levels?
We often hear the term _levels_, when discussing about programming languages viz. low level, high level and what not.

The level here is used to indicate how close a programming language is to the hardware. The less the layers of abstraction b/w the code the programmer is writing in, and the instructions that can be understood by the microprocessor, the _lower_ level it's said to be.

:::

### Machine language (first-generation)

Title | Description
-|-
What is machine language | The microprocessor only understands binary viz. 0 and 1, that is machine language.
Advantages | <li>It's incredibly flexible and powerful to write in machine language, but it's incredible hard to maintain the codebase and collaborate upon.</li><li>Instructions are directly understood by the microprocessor making it incredible fast in nature.</li>
Disadvantages | The code varies from machine to machine, making it extremely processor dependent, and prone to errors.
Format of a machine level instruction | There is the opcode which is used to specify what operation is to be performed, and then there are operands, which are the data piece(s) upon which the operation will take place.

```
Format of a machine level instruction
┌────────┬──────────────┐
│ 0101   │00111   11110 │
└────────┴──────────────┘
Opcode     Operands

```

### Assembly (second-generation)

Title | Description
-|-
The need for abstraction | <li>Writing machine code was extremely hard, error prone, time consuming and processor dependent</li><li>. We needed abstraction, Assembly was the layer of abstraction which was introduced, in which, instead of binary instructions, mnemonics were used which were just mapping over binary instructions, but behind the scenes, take for example the `MOV` instruction, it would get mapped to the real binary instruction which the microprocessor understands (let's assume `0011`), then there would be a mapping b/w `MOV` and `0011` and this translation would be facilitate with the help of an assembler because the microprocessor can't understand Assembly(more on this later)</li>
Understanding assembly | Assembly programming is very specific to processor families, such as x86, amd64, ARM, RISC-V and what not. Also, it introduces the concept of _Labels_ and comments, the former being used to make addressing easier in our code.
Advantages | <li>Relatively easier to understand, and to code in, with less probability for errors</li>
Disadvantages | It's still hard to learn, and takes time to develop programs with.


```nasm
;;An example assembly syntax, targeting the nasm assembler and x86_64 assembly
global _start

section .text
	_start:
		mov RBX, RAX
```

```sh
#We assemble the code with nasm and link using ld (more on this later)

$ nasm hi.asm -o objectfile.o -f elf64
$ ld objectfile.o -o finalExecutable


$ objdump -d finalExecutable -M intel

finalExecutable:     file format elf64-x86-64

Disassembly of section .text:

0000000000401000 <_start>:
  401000:       48 89 c3                mov    rbx,rax
```

If we convert the above assembly to its corresponding shellcode format, it becomes 
```
\x48\x89\xc3 or 01001000 10001001 11000011
```

This translation is achieved with the help of an assembler. Although, there are things that an assembler simply can't do, but that's outside the scope of discussion for now, and will be discussed in Linking.

```
   ┌────────────────────┐
   │ global _start      │
   │                    │    ┌─────────┐      ┌──────────────────────────┐
   │ section .text      ├────►Assembler├─────►│01001000 10001001 11000011│
   │    _start:         │    └─────────┘      └──────────────────────────┘
   │       mov RBX, RAX │
   └────────────────────┘

```


### High level languages (third-generation)

Title | Description
-|-
Why learn HLLs | <li>Since all the binary and mnemonics is difficult to learn and to code with, High Level Languages were developed</li><li>Examples: C, Java, Cobol, FORTRAN etc</li>
Advantages | <li>Offers ease of development, and is machine independent (except in some cases when we're writing platform specific code)</li><li>A lot of hardware operations are managed by the language itself</li>
Disadvantages | Less flexible and all the abstraction increase the execution time of an application.


:::info Programming Paradigms

Paradigms are a way to classify programming languages based on their features, and the way how several things are done.

There are a lot of them out there, such as 	Imperative paradigm, Declarative paradigm, Object Oriented paradigm etc. For reference, pick up any basic computer science book.
:::
